Total pages: 26
--- PAGE 1 ---
Chapter 1
A Review of General Chemistry:
Electrons, Bonds and Molecular Properties
Review of Concepts
Fill in the blanks below. To verify that your answers are correct, look in your textbook at the end of
Chapter 1. Each of the sentences below appears verbatim in the section entitled Review of Concepts and
Vocabulary.
 _____________ isomers share the same molecular formula but have different connectivity of
atoms and different physical properties.
 Second-row elements generally obey the _______ rule, bonding to achieve noble gas electron
configuration.
 A pair of unshared electrons is called a ______________.
 A formal charge occurs when atoms do not exhibit the appropriate number of
___________________________.
 An atomic orbital is a region of space associated with ____________________, while a
molecular orbital is associated with _______________________.
 Methane’s tetrahedral geometry can be explained using four degenerate _____-hybridized
orbitals to achieve its four single bonds.
 Ethylene’s planar geometry can be explained using three degenerate _____-hybridized orbitals.
 Acetylene’s linear geometry is achieved via _____-hybridized carbon atoms.
 The geometry of small compounds can be predicted using valence shell electron pair repulsion
(VSEPR) theory, which focuses on the number of  bonds and _______________
exhibited by each atom.
 The physical properties of compounds are determined by __________________ forces, the
attractive forces between molecules.
 London dispersion forces result from the interaction between transient __________________
and are stronger for larger alkanes due to their larger surface area and ability to accommodate
more interactions.
Review of Skills
Fill in the blanks and empty boxes below. To verify that your answers are correct, look in your textbook at
the end of Chapter 1. The answers appear in the section entitled SkillBuilder Review.
SkillBuilder 1.1 Drawing Constitutional Isomers of Small Molecules
SkillBuilder 1.2 Drawing the Lewis Structure of a Small Molecule
--- PAGE 2 ---
2 CHAPTER 1
SkillBuilder 1.3 Calculating Formal Charge
SkillBuilder 1.4 Locating Partial Charges Resulting from Induction
SkillBuilder 1.5 Reading Bond-Line Structures
SkillBuilder 1.6 Identifying Electron Configurations
Step 1 In the energy Step 2 Fill in the boxes below with the
diagram shown here, 2p numbers that correctly describe the
draw the electron electron configuration of nitrogen.
configuration of nitrogen 2s
(using arrows to
represent electrons). 1s 1s 2s 2p
Nitrogen
SkillBuilder 1.7 Identifying Hybridization States
--- PAGE 3 ---
CHAPTER 1 3
SkillBuilder 1.8 Predicting Geometry
SkillBuilder 1.9 Identifying the Presence of Molecular Dipole Moments
SkillBuilder 1.10 Predicting Physical Properties
Dipole-Dipole Interactions Hydrogen-Bonding Interactions Carbon Skeleton
Circle the compound below that Circle the compound below that is Circle the compound below that is expected
is expected to have the higher expected to have the higher boiling point. to have the higher boiling point.
boiling point.
CH O H H H H H H H H H H H H
2
C C H C O C H H C C O H H C C C H H C C C C C H
H C CH H C CH
3 3 3 3
H H H H H H H H H H H H
A Common Mistake to Avoid
When drawing a structure, don’t forget to draw formal charges, as forgetting to do so is a common error. If
a formal charge is present, it MUST be drawn. For example, in the following case, the nitrogen atom bears
a positive charge, so the charge must be drawn:
As we progress though the course, we will see structures of increasing complexity. If formal charges are
present, failure to draw them constitutes an error, and must be scrupulously avoided. If you have trouble
drawing formal charges, go back and master that skill. You can’t go on without it. Don’t make the mistake
of underestimating the importance of being able to draw formal charges with confidence.
--- PAGE 4 ---
4 CHAPTER 1
Solutions
1.1.
(a) Begin by determining the valency of each atom that
appears in the molecular formula. The carbon atoms are
tetravalent, while the chlorine atom and hydrogen atoms
are all monovalent. The atoms with more than one bond Finally, we can draw three carbon atoms in a linear
(in this case, the three carbon atoms) should be drawn in fashion, and then draw the remaining two carbon atoms
the center of the compound. Then, the chlorine atom can on separate branches.
be placed in either of two locations: i) connected to the
central carbon atom, or ii) connected to one of the other
two (equivalent) carbon atoms. The hydrogen atoms are
then placed at the periphery (ensuring that each carbon
atom has a total of four bonds). The formula C3H7Cl has
Note that we cannot draw a unique carbon skeleton (a
two constitutional isomers.
unique arrangement of carbon atoms) simply by placing
the last two carbon atoms together as one branch, because
that possibility has already been drawn earlier (a linear
chain of four carbon atoms with a single branch):
(b) Begin by determining the valency of each atom that
appears in the molecular formula. The carbon atoms are
tetravalent, while the hydrogen atoms are all monovalent.
The atoms with more than one bond (in this case, the four
carbon atoms) should be drawn in the center of the
In summary, there are three different ways to connect five
compound. There are two different ways to connect four
carbon atoms:
carbon atoms. They can either be arranged in a linear
fashion or in a branched fashion:
We then place the hydrogen atoms at the periphery
(ensuring that each carbon atom has a total of four bonds).
We then place the hydrogen atoms at the periphery
The formula C5H12 has three constitutional isomers:
(ensuring that each carbon atom has a total of four bonds).
The formula C4H10 has two constitutional isomers:
(c) Begin by determining the valency of each atom that
appears in the molecular formula. The carbon atoms are
tetravalent, while the hydrogen atoms are all monovalent.
The atoms with more than one bond (in this case, the five (d) Begin by determining the valency of each atom that
carbon atoms) should be drawn in the center of the appears in the molecular formula. The carbon atoms are
compound. So we must explore all of the different ways tetravalent, the oxygen atom is divalent, and the hydrogen
to connect five carbon atoms. First, we can connect all atoms are all monovalent. Any atoms with more than one
five carbon atoms in a linear fashion: bond (in this case, the four carbon atoms and the one
oxygen atom) should be drawn in the center of the
compound, with the hydrogen atoms at the periphery.
There are several different ways to connect four carbon
atoms and one oxygen atom. Let’s begin with the four
Alternatively, we can draw four carbon atoms in a linear
carbon atoms. There are two different ways to connect
fashion, and then draw the fifth carbon atom on a branch.
four carbon atoms. They can 
--- PAGE 5 ---
CHAPTER 1 5
the center of the compound. There is only way to connect
three carbon atoms:
Next, the oxygen atom must be inserted. For each of the Next, we must determine all of the different possible ways
two skeletons above (linear or branched), there are several of connecting two chlorine atoms to the chain of three
different locations to insert the oxygen atom. The linear carbon atoms. If we place one chlorine atom at C1, then
skeleton has four possibilities, shown here: the second chlorine atom can be placed at C1, at C2 or at
C3:
O O
C C C C C C C C
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
Furthermore, we can place both chlorine atoms at C2,
C O C C C C C O C C giving a new possibility not shown above:
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
and the branched skeleton has three possibilities shown
here:
There are no other possibilities. For example, placing the
two chlorine atoms at C2 and C3 is equivalent to placing
Finally, we complete all of the structures by drawing the them at C1 and C2:
bonds to hydrogen atoms (ensuring that each carbon atom
has four bonds, and each oxygen atoms has two bonds).
The formula C4H10O has seven constitutional isomers:
Finally, the hydrogen atoms are placed at the periphery
(ensuring that each carbon atom has a total of four bonds).
The formula C3H6Cl2 has four constitutional isomers:
1.2. The carbon atoms are tetravalent, while the chlorine
atoms and fluorine atoms are all monovalent. The atoms
with more than one bond (in this case, the two carbon
atoms) should be drawn in the center of the compound.
The chlorine atoms and fluorine atoms are then placed at
the periphery, as shown. There are only two possible
constitutional isomers: one with the three chlorine atoms
all connected to the same carbon, and one in which they
are distributed over both carbon atoms. Any other
representations that one may draw must be one of these
(e) Begin by determining the valency of each atom that structures drawn in a different orientation.
appears in the molecular formula. The carbon atoms are
tetravalent, while the chlorine atom and hydrogen atoms
are all monovalent. The atoms with more than one bond
(in this case, the three carbon atoms) should be drawn in
--- PAGE 6 ---
6 CHAPTER 1
1.3. 1.5. Each of the carbon atoms has four valence electrons;
(a) Each carbon atom has four valence electrons, and each the nitrogen atom has five valence electrons; and each of
hydrogen atom has one valence electron. Only the carbon the hydrogen atoms has one valence electron. We begin
atoms can form more than one bond, so we begin by by connecting the atoms that have more than one bond (in
connecting the carbon atoms to each other. Then, we this case, the three carbon atoms and the nitrogen atom).
connect all of the hydrogen atoms, as shown. There are four different ways that these four atoms can be
connected to each other, shown here.
(b) Each carbon atom has four valence electrons, and each
hydrogen atom has one valence electron. Only the carbon
atoms can form more than one bond, so we begin by
connecting the carbon atoms to each other. Then, we
connect all of the hydrogen atoms, and the unpaired
electrons are shared to give a double bond. In this way,
each of the carbon atoms achieves an octet.
For each of these possible arrangements, we connect the
hydrogen atoms, giving the following four constitutional
isomers.
(c) Each carbon atom has four valence electrons, and each
hydrogen atom has one valence electron. Only the carbon
atoms can form more than one bond, so we begin by
connecting the carbon atoms to each other. Then, we
connect all of the hydrogen atoms, and the unpaired
electrons are shared to give a triple bond. In this way,
each of the carbon atoms achieves an octet.
In each of these four structures, the nitrogen atom has one
(d) Each carbon atom has four valence electrons, and each
lone pair.
hydrogen atom has one valence electron. Only the carbon
atoms can form more than one bond, so we begin by
1.6.
connecting the carbon atoms to each other. Then, we
(a) The carbon atom has four valence electrons, the
connect all of the hydrogen atoms, as shown.
nitrogen atom has five valence electrons and the hydrogen
atom has one valence electron. Only the carbon atom and
the nitrogen atom can form more than one bond, so we
begin by connecting them to each other. Then, we connect
the hydrogen atom to the carbon, as shown. The unpaired
(e) The carbon atom has four valence electrons, the electrons are shared to give a triple bond. In this way, both
oxygen atom has six valence electrons, and each hydrogen the carbon atom and the nitrogen atom achieve an octet.
atom has one valence electron. Only the carbon atom and
the oxygen atom can form more than one bond, so we
begin by connecting them to each other. Then, we connect
all of the hydrogen atoms, as shown. (b) Each carbon atom has four valence electrons, and each
hydrogen atom has one valence electron. Only the carbon
atoms can form more than one bond, so we begin by
connecting the carbon atoms to each other. Then, we
connect all of the hydrogen atoms as indicated in the given
condensed formula (CH2CHCHCH2), and the unpaired
1.4. Boron is in column 3A of the periodic table, so it has
--- PAGE 7 ---
CHAPTER 1 7
case, the aluminum atom exhibits four valence electrons the oxygen atom exhibits only five valence electrons (one
(one for each bond). With one extra electron, this for each bond, and two for the lone pair). This oxygen
aluminum atom will bear a negative charge. atom is missing an electron, and it therefore bears a
positive charge.
(b) Oxygen is in group 6A of the periodic table, and it (h) Two of the atoms in this structure exhibit a formal
should therefore have six valence electrons. In this case, charge because each of these atoms does not exhibit the
the oxygen atom exhibits only five valence electrons (one appropriate number of valence electrons. The aluminum
for each bond, and two for the lone pair). This oxygen atom (group 3A) should have three valence electrons, but
atom is missing an electron, and it therefore bears a it exhibits four (one for each bond). With one extra
positive charge. electron, this aluminum atom will bear a negative charge.
The neighboring chlorine atom (to the right) should have
seven valence electrons, but it exhibits only six (one for
each bond and two for each lone pair). It is missing one
electron, so this chlorine atom will bear a positive charge.
(c) Nitrogen is in group 5A of the periodic table, and it
should therefore have five valence electrons. In this case,
the nitrogen atom exhibits six valence electrons (one for
each bond and two for each lone pair). With one extra
electron, this nitrogen atom will bear a negative charge.
(i) Two of the atoms in this structure exhibit a formal
charge because each of these atoms does not exhibit the
appropriate number of valence electrons. The nitrogen
atom (group 5A) should have five valence electrons, but
(d) Oxygen is in group 6A of the periodic table, and it it exhibits four (one for each bond). It is missing one
should therefore have six valence electrons. In this case, electron, so this nitrogen atom will bear a positive charge.
the oxygen atom exhibits only five valence electrons (one One of the two oxygen atoms (the one on the right)
for each bond, and two for the lone pair). This oxygen exhibits seven valence electrons (one for the bond, and
atom is missing an electron, and it therefore bears a two for each lone pair), although it should have only six.
positive charge. With one extra electron, this oxygen atom will bear a
negative charge.
(e) Carbon is in group 4A of the periodic table, and it
should therefore have four valence electrons. In this case, 1.8.
the carbon atom exhibits five valence electrons (one for (a) The boron atom in this case exhibits four valence
each bond and two for the lone pair). With one extra electrons (one for each bond), although boron (group 3A)
electron, this carbon atom will bear a negative charge. should only have three valence electrons. With one extra
electron, this boron atom bears a negative charge.
(f) Carbon is in group 4A of the periodic table, and it
should therefore have four valence electrons. In this case,
th
--- PAGE 8 ---
8 CHAPTER 1
(c) One of the carbon atoms (below right) exhibits three (b) Fluorine is more electronegative than carbon, and a
valence electrons (one for each bond), but carbon (group C–F bond is polar covalent. For a C–F bond, the F will be
4A) is supposed to have four valence electrons. It is electron-rich (‒), and the C will be electron-poor (+).
missing one electron, so this carbon atom therefore bears Chlorine is also more electronegative than carbon, so a
a positive charge. C–Cl bond is also polar covalent. For a C–Cl bond, the
Cl will be electron-rich (‒), and the C will be electron-
poor (+), as shown below.
1.9. Carbon is in group 4A of the periodic table, and it
should therefore have four valence electrons. Every
carbon atom in acetylcholine has four bonds, thus
(c) Carbon is more electronegative than magnesium, so
exhibiting the correct number of valence electrons (four)
the C will be electron-rich (‒) in a C–Mg bond, and the
and having no formal charge.
Mg will be electron-poor (+). Also, bromine is more
electronegative than magnesium. So in a Mg–Br bond,
the Br will be electron-rich (‒), and the Mg will be
electron-poor (+), as shown below.
Oxygen is in group 6A of the periodic table, and it should
therefore have six valence electrons. Each oxygen atom in
acetylcholine has two bonds and two lone pairs of (d) Oxygen is more electronegative than carbon or
electrons, so each oxygen atom exhibits six valence hydrogen, so all C–O bonds and all O–H bond are polar
electrons (one for each bond, and two for each lone pair). covalent. For each C–O bond and each O–H bond, the O
With the correct number of valence electrons, each will be electron-rich (‒), and the C or H will be electron-
oxygen atom will lack a formal charge. poor (+), as shown below.
(e) Oxygen is more electronegative than carbon. As such,
the O will be electron-rich (‒) and the C will be electron-
The nitrogen atom (group 5A) should have five valence
poor (+) in a C=O bond, as shown below.
electrons, but it exhibits four (one for each bond). It is
missing one electron, so this nitrogen atom will bear a
positive charge.
(f) Chlorine is more electronegative than carbon. As
such, for each C–Cl bond, the Cl will be electron-rich
(‒) and the C will be electron-poor (+), as shown below.
1.10.
(a) Oxygen is more electronegative than carbon, and a
C–O bond is polar covalent. For each C–O bond, the O
will be electron-rich (‒), and the C will be electron-poor
(+), as shown below.
1.11. Oxygen is more electronegative than carbon. As
such, the O will be electron-rich (‒) and the C will be
electron-poor (+) in a C=O bond. In addition, chlorine
is more electronegative than carbon. So for a C–Cl bond,
--- PAGE 9 ---
CHAPTER 1 9
the Cl will be electron-rich (‒) and the C will be electron- (d) Each corner represents a carbon atom (highlighted
poor (+), as shown below. below), so this compound has seven carbon atoms. Each
carbon atom has enough attached hydrogen atoms to have
exactly four bonds, as shown:
Notice that two carbon atoms are electron-poor (+).
These are the positions that are most likely to be attacked
by an electron-rich anion, such as hydroxide.
(e) Each corner and each endpoint represents a carbon
1.12. Oxygen is more electronegative than carbon. As atom (highlighted below), so this compound has seven
such, the O will be electron-rich (δ−) and the C will be carbon atoms. Each carbon atom has enough attached
electron-poor (δ+) in a C─O bond. In addition, chlorine is hydrogen atoms to have exactly four bonds, as shown:
more electronegative than carbon. So for a C─Cl bond,
the Cl will be electron-rich (δ−) and the C will be electron-
poor (δ+), as shown below. As you might imagine,
epichlorohydrin is a very reactive molecule!
(f) Each corner represents a carbon atom (highlighted
below), so this compound has seven carbon atoms. Each
1.13. carbon atom has enough attached hydrogen atoms to have
(a) Each corner and each endpoint represents a carbon exactly four bonds, as shown:
atom (highlighted below), so this compound has six
carbon atoms. Each carbon atom has enough attached
hydrogen atoms to have exactly four bonds, as shown:
1.14. Remember that each corner and each endpoint
represents a carbon atom. This compound therefore has
16 carbon atoms, highlighted below:
N N
(b) Each corner and each endpoint represents a carbon O N
atom (highlighted below), so this compound has twelve N NH
carbon atoms. Each carbon atom has enough attached
hydrogen atoms to have exactly four bonds, as shown:
N
Each carbon atom should have four bonds. We therefore
draw enough hydrogen atoms in order to give each carbon
atom a total of four bonds. Any carbon atoms that already
have four bonds will not have any hydrogen atoms:
H H H H H
(c) Each corner represents a carbon atom (highlighted H H H
below), so this compound has six carbon atoms. Each H C C C
C C N N
carbon atom has enough attached hydrogen atoms to have H
exactly four bonds, as shown: O N C C C
C C N C N H
C H H C C C
C H H HH
N H H H
1.15.
(a) As indicated in Figure 1.10, carbon has two 1s
electrons, two 2s electrons, and two 2p electrons. This
--- PAGE 10 ---
10 CHAPTER 1
information is represented by the following electron 1.18. The angles of an equilateral triangle are 60º, but
configuration: 1s22s22p2 each bond angle of cyclopropane is supposed to be 109.5º.
Therefore, each bond angle is severely strained, causing
(b) As indicated in Figure 1.10, oxygen has two 1s an increase in energy. This form of strain, called ring
electrons, two 2s electrons, and four 2p electrons. This strain, will be discussed in Chapter 4. The ring strain
information is represented by the following electron associated with a three-membered ring is greater than the
configuration: 1s22s22p4 ring strain of larger rings, because larger rings do not
require bond angles of 60º.
(c) As indicated in Figure 1.10, boron has two 1s
1.19.
electrons, two 2s electrons, and one 2p electron. This
information is represented by the following electron (a) The C=O bond of formaldehyde is comprised of one 
configuration: 1s22s22p1 bond and one  bond.
(b) Each C‒H bond is formed from the interaction
(d) As indicated in Figure 1.10, fluorine has two 1s
between an sp2-hybridized orbital from carbon and an s
electrons, two 2s electrons, and five 2p electrons. This
orbital from hydrogen.
information is represented by the following electron
configuration: 1s22s22p5 (c) The oxygen atom is sp2 hybridized, so the lone pairs
occupy sp2-hybridized orbitals.
(e) Sodium has two 1s electrons, two 2s electrons, six 2p
electrons, and one 3s electron. This information is 1.20. Rotation of a single bond does not cause a reduction
represented by the following electron configuration: in the extent of orbital overlap, because the orbital overlap
1s22s22p63s1 occurs on the bond axis. In contrast, rotation of a  bond
results in a reduction in the extent of orbital overlap
(f) Aluminum has two 1s electrons, two 2s electrons, six between the two p orbitals, because the orbital overlap is
2p electrons, two 3s electrons, and one 3p electron. This NOT on the bond axis.
information is represented by the following electron
configuration: 1s22s22p63s23p1 1.21.
(a) The highlighted carbon atom (below) has four
1.16. bonds, and is therefore sp3 hybridized. The other carbon
(a) The electron configuration of a carbon atom is atoms in this structure are all sp2 hybridized, because each
1s22s22p2 (see the solution to Problem 1.15a). However,
of them has three bonds and one  bond.
if a carbon atom bears a negative charge, then it must have
one extra electron, so the electron configuration should be
as follows: 1s22s22p3
(b) The electron configuration of a carbon atom is
1s22s22p2 (see the solution to Problem 1.15a). However,
if a carbon atom bears a positive charge, then it must be
missing an electron, so the electron configuration should
(b) Each of the highlighted carbon atoms has four
be as follows: 1s22s22p1
bonds, and is therefore sp3 hybridized. The other two
carbon atoms in this structure are sp hybridized, because
(c) As seen in SkillBuilder 1.6, the electron confi
--- PAGE 11 ---
CHAPTER 1 11
(d) Each of the two central carbon atoms has two bonds 1.23. Carbon-carbon triple bonds generally have a shorter
and two  bonds, and as such, each of these carbon atoms bond length than carbon-carbon double bonds, which are
is sp hybridized. The other two carbon atoms (the outer generally shorter than carbon-carbon single bonds (see
ones) are sp2 hybridized because each has three bonds Table 1.2).
and one  bond.
(e) One of the carbon atoms (the one connected to oxygen)
has two bonds and two  bonds, and as such, it is sp
1.24.
hybridized. The other carbon atom is sp2 hybridized
(a) In this structure, the boron atom has four  bonds and
because it has three bonds and one  bond.
no lone pairs, giving a total of four electron pairs (steric
number = 4). VSEPR theory therefore predicts a
tetrahedral arrangement of electron pairs. Since all of the
electron pairs are bonds, the structure is expected to have
tetrahedral geometry.
(b) In this structure, the boron atom has three  bonds and
no lone pairs, giving a total of three electron pairs (steric
number = 3). VSEPR theory therefore predicts a trigonal
1.22. Each of the following three highlighted carbon planar geometry.
atoms has four  bonds, and is therefore sp3 hybridized: (c) In this structure, the nitrogen atom has four  sigma
bonds and no lone pairs, giving a total of four electron
pairs (steric number = 4). VSEPR theory therefore
predicts a tetrahedral arrangement of electron pairs. Since
all of the electron pairs are bonds, the structure is expected
to have tetrahedral geometry.
(d) The carbon atom has four  bonds and no lone pairs,
giving a total of four electron pairs (steric number = 4).
VSEPR theory therefore predicts a tetrahedral
arrangement of electron pairs. Since all of the electron
pairs are bonds, the structure is expected to have
And each of the following three highlighted carbon atoms tetrahedral geometry.
has three  bonds and one  bond, and is therefore sp2
hybridized: 1.25. In the carbocation, the carbon atom has three bonds
and no lone pairs. Since there are a total of three electron
pairs (steric number = 3), and all three are bonds, VSEPR
theory predicts trigonal planar geometry, with bond
angles of 120°. In contrast, the carbon atom of the
carbanion has three bonds and one lone pair, giving a total
of four electron pairs (steric number = 4). For this ion,
VSEPR theory predicts a tetrahedral arrangement of
electron pairs, with a lone pair positioned at one corner of
the tetrahedron, giving rise to trigonal pyramidal
geometry with bond angles approximately 107°.
Finally, each of the following five highlighted carbon
atoms has two  bonds and two  bonds, and is therefore 1.26. In ammonia, the nitrogen atom has three bonds and
sp hybridized. one lone pair. Therefore, VSEPR theory predicts trigonal
pyramidal geometry, with bond angles of approximately
107°. In the ammonium ion, the nitrogen atom has four
bonds and no lone pairs, so VSEPR theory predic
--- PAGE 12 ---
12 CHAPTER 1
that the arrangement of electron pairs will be tetrahedral. C–Br bonds, and as such, there is a net molecular dipole
With no lone pairs, the arrangement of the atoms moment, shown here:
(geometry) is the same as the electronic arrangement. It
is tetrahedral.
(e) The oxygen atom has two bonds and two lone pairs
(steric number = 4), and VSEPR theory predicts bent
geometry. As such, the dipole moments associated with
1.28.
the polar C–O bonds do not fully cancel each other, and
(a) This compound has three C–Cl bonds, each of which
the dipole moments associated with the lone pairs also do
exhibits a dipole moment. To determine if these dipole
not fully cancel each other. As a result, there is a net
moments cancel each other, we must identify the
molecular dipole moment, as shown:
molecular geometry. The central carbon atom has four
bonds so we expect tetrahedral geometry. As such, the
three polar C–Cl bonds do not lie in the same plane, and
they do not completely cancel each other out. There is a
net molecular dipole moment, as shown:
(f) There are individual dipole moments associated with
each polar C–O bond and the lone pairs (as in the previous
solution), but due to the symmetrical shape of the
molecule in this case, they fully cancel each other to give
(b) The oxygen atom has two bonds and two lone pairs no net molecular dipole moment.
(steric number = 4), and VSEPR theory predicts bent
geometry. As such, the dipole moments associated with (g) Each C=O bond has a strong dipole moment, and they
the polar C–O bonds do not fully cancel each other, and do not fully cancel each other because they are not
the dipole moments associated with the lone pairs also do pointing in opposite directions. As such, there will be a
not fully cancel each other. As a result, there is a net net molecular dipole moment, as shown here:
molecular dipole moment, as shown:
(c) The nitrogen atom has three bonds and one lone pair
(steric number = 4), and VSEPR theory predicts trigonal
pyramidal geometry (because one corner of the
tetrahedron is occupied by a lone pair). As such, the
(h) Each C=O bond has a strong dipole moment, and in
dipole moments associated with the polar N–H bonds do
this case, they are pointing in opposite directions. As
not fully cancel each other, and there is also a dipole
such, they fully cancel each other, giving no net molecular
moment associated with the lone pair (pointing up). As a
dipole moment.
result, there is a net molecular dipole moment, as shown:
(i) Each C–Cl bond has a dipole moment, and they do not
fully cancel each other because the polar bonds are not
pointing in opposite directions. As such, there will be a
net molecular dipole moment, as shown here:
(d) The central carbon atom has four bonds (steric
number = 4), and VSEPR theory predicts tetrahedral
geometry. There are individual dipole moments
associated with each of the C–Cl bonds and each of the
C–Br bonds. If all four dipole moments had the same
magnitud
--- PAGE 13 ---
CHAPTER 1 13
in opposite directions. As such, there will be a net (c) The second compound is expected to have a higher
molecular dipole moment, as shown here: boiling point, because it has an O–H bond, which will lead
to hydrogen-bonding interactions between molecules.
(d) Both compounds have the same molecular weight
(l) Each C–Cl bond has a dipole moment, but in this case,
because they are isomers, and they are both capable of
they fully cancel each other to give no net molecular
forming hydrogen bonds. The first compound is expected
dipole moment.
to have a higher boiling point, however, because it is less
branched. The greater surface area in the first compound
1.29. Each of the C–O bonds has an individual dipole
results in greater London dispersion forces and a higher
moment, shown here:
boiling point (b.p.):
To determine if these individual dipole moments fully
cancel each other, we must determine the geometry 1.31. Compound 3 is expected to have a higher boiling
around the oxygen atom. The oxygen atom has two  point than compound 4, because only compound 3 has an
bonds and two lone pairs, giving rise to a bent geometry. O-H group. Compound 4 does not form hydrogen-bonds,
As such, the dipole moments associated with the polar so it will have a lower boiling point. When this mixture is
C–O bonds do NOT fully cancel each other, heated, the lower boiling compound (4) can be collected
first, leaving behind compound 3.
and the dipole moments associated with the lone pairs also
do not fully cancel each other. As a result, there is a net
molecular dipole moment, as shown:
1.32.
(a) The carbon atoms are tetravalent, while the chlorine
atom and hydrogen atoms are all monovalent. The atoms
with more than one bond (in this case, the two carbon
atoms) should be drawn in the center of the compound.
The chlorine atom and hydrogen atoms are then placed at
1.30. the periphery (ensuring that each carbon atom has a total
(a) Both compounds have the same molecular weight of four bonds), as shown:
because they are isomers. The second compound is
expected to have a higher boiling point, because it is less
branched. The greater surface area in the second
compound results in greater London dispersion forces and
a higher boiling point (b.p.):
The chlorine atom can be placed in any one of the six
available positions. The following six drawings all
represent the same compound, in which the two carbon
atoms are connected to each other, and the chlorine atom
is connected to one of the carbon atoms.
(b) The second compound is expected to have a higher
boiling point, because more carbon atoms results in a
higher molecular weight. Larger compounds have greater
London dispersion forces and a higher boiling point (b.p.):
higher b.p.
--- PAGE 14 ---
14 CHAPTER 1
(b) The carbon atoms are tetravalent, while the chlorine
atoms and hydrogen atoms are all monovalent. The atoms
with more than one bond (in this case, the two carbon
atoms) should be drawn in the center of the compound.
The chlorine atoms and hydrogen atoms are then placed
at the periphery, and there are two different ways to do
this. The two chlorine atoms can either be connected to
the same carbon atom or to different carbon atoms, as
shown.
(c) The carbon atoms are tetravalent, while the chlorine
atoms and hydrogen atoms are all monovalent. The atoms
with more than one bond (in this case, the two carbon
atoms) should be drawn in the center of the compound.
The chlorine atoms and hydrogen atoms are then placed
at the periphery, and there are two different ways to do
this. One way is to connect all three chlorine atoms to the
same carbon atom. Alternatively, we can connect two
chlorine atoms to one carbon atom, and then connect the
third chlorine atom to the other carbon atom, as shown
1.33.
here:
(a) According to Table 1.1, the difference in
electronegativity between Br and H is 2.8 – 2.1 = 0.7, so
an H–Br bond is expected to be polar covalent. Since
bromine is more electronegative than hydrogen, the Br
will be electron-rich (‒), and the H will be electron-poor
(d) The carbon atoms are tetravalent, and the hydrogen (+), as shown below:
atoms are all monovalent. Any atoms with more than one
bond (in this case, the six carbon atoms) should be drawn
in the center of the compound, with the hydrogen atoms
at the periphery. There are five different ways to connect (b) According to Table 1.1, the difference in
six carbon atoms, which we will organize based on the electronegativity between Cl and H is 3.0 – 2.1 = 0.9, so
length of the longest chain. an H–Cl bond is expected to be polar covalent. Since
chlorine is more electronegative than hydrogen, the Cl
will be electron-rich (‒), and the H will be electron-poor
(+), as shown below:
(c) According to Table 1.1, the difference in
electronegativity between O and H is 3.5 – 2.1 = 1.4, so
an O–H bond is expected to be polar covalent. Oxygen is
more electronegative than hydrogen, so for each O–H
bond, the O will be electron-rich (‒) and the H will be
electron-poor (+), as shown below:
Finally, we complete all of the structures by drawing the
(d) According to Table 1.1, oxygen (3.5) is more
bonds to hydrogen atoms (ensuring that each carbon atom
electronegative than carbon (2.5) or hydrogen (2.1), and a
has a total of four bonds). There are a total of five isomers:
C–O or H–O bond is polar covalent. For each C–O or
H–O bond, the O will be electron-rich (‒), and the C or
H will be electron-poor (+), as shown below:
--- PAGE 15 ---
CHAPTER 1 15
1.34.
(a) The difference in electronegativity between Na (0.9)
and Br (2.8) is greater than the difference in
electronegativity between H (2.1) and Br (2.8). Therefore,
NaBr is expected to have more ionic character than HBr.
The nitrogen atom has three bonds and one lone pair, so
(b) The difference in electronegativity between F (4.0)
the steric number is 4, which means that the arrangement
and Cl (3.0) is greater than the difference in
of electron pairs is expected to be tetrahedral. One corner
electronegativity between Br (2.8) and Cl (3.0).
of the tetrahedron is occupied by a lone pair, so the
Therefore, FCl is expected to have more ionic character
geometry of the nitrogen atom (the arrangement of atoms
than BrCl.
around that nitrogen atom) is trigonal pyramidal. As such,
the individual dipole moments associated with the C–N
1.35.
bonds do not fully cancel each other, and there is also a
(a) Each carbon atom has four valence electrons, the
dipole moment associated with the lone pair (pointing up).
oxygen atom has six valence electrons, and each hydrogen
As a result, there is a net molecular dipole moment, as
atom has one valence electron. In this case, the
shown:
information provided in the problem statement
(CH3CH2OH) indicates how the atoms are connected to
each other:
1.37. Bromine is in group 7A of the periodic table, so
each bromine atom has seven valence electrons.
Aluminum is in group 3A of the periodic table, so
aluminum is supposed to have three valence electrons, but
(b) Each carbon atom has four valence electrons, the
the structure bears a negative charge, which means that
nitrogen atom has five valence electrons, and each
there is one extra electron. That is, the aluminum atom
hydrogen atom has one valence electron. In this case, the
has four valence electrons, rather than three, which is why
information provided in the problem statement (CH3CN)
it has a formal negative charge. This gives the following
indicates how the atoms are connected to each other:
Lewis structure:
The unpaired electrons are then paired up to give a triple
bond. In this way, each of the atoms achieves an octet.
The aluminum atom has four bonds and no lone pairs, so
the steric number is 4, which means that this aluminum
atom will have tetrahedral geometry.
1.38. The molecular formula of cyclopropane is C3H6, so
1.36. Each of the carbon atoms has four valence electrons;
we are looking for a different compound that has the same
the nitrogen atom has five valence electrons, and each of
molecular formula, C3H6. That is, we need to find another
the hydrogen atoms has one valence electron. We begin
way to connect the carbon atoms, other than in a ring
by connecting the atoms that have more than one bond (in
(there is only one way to connect three carbon atoms in a
this case, the four carbon atoms and the nitrogen atom).
ring, so we must be looking for something other than a
The problem statement indicates how we should connect
ring). If we connect the
--- PAGE 16 ---
16 CHAPTER 1
We are looking for a structure with the molecular formula completely cancel each other out, and there is no net
C3H6. If we remove two hydrogen atoms from our molecular dipole moment.
drawing, we are left with two unpaired electrons,
indicating that we should consider drawing a double bond: (f) This compound has two C–Br bonds, each of which
exhibits a dipole moment. To determine if these dipole
moments cancel each other, we must identify the
molecular geometry. The central carbon atom has four
bonds so it is expected to have tetrahedral geometry. As
such, the polar C–Br bonds do not completely cancel each
other out. There is a net molecular dipole moment, as
shown:
The structure of this compound (called propylene) is 1.40.
different from the structure of cyclopropane, but both (a) As indicated in Figure 1.10, a neutral oxygen atom has
compounds share the same molecular formula, so they are two 1s electrons, two 2s electrons, and four 2p electrons.
constitutional isomers. (b) As indicated in Figure 1.10, a neutral fluorine atom
has two 1s electrons, two 2s electrons, and five 2p
1.39. electrons.
(a) C–H bonds are considered to be nonpolar, although (c) As indicated in Figure 1.10, a neutral carbon atom has
they do have a very small dipole moment, because there two 1s electrons, two 2s electrons, and two 2p electrons.
is a small difference in electronegativity between carbon (d) As seen in SkillBuilder 1.6, the electron configuration
(2.5) and hydrogen (2.1). With no polar bonds present, of a neutral nitrogen atom is 1s22s22p3
the molecule does not have a molecular dipole moment. (e) This is the electron configuration of a neutral chlorine
atom.
(b) The nitrogen atom has trigonal pyramidal geometry.
As such, the dipole moments associated with the polar N–
H bonds do not fully cancel each other, and there is also a 1.41.
dipole moment associated with the lone pair (pointing up). (a) The difference in electronegativity between sodium
As a result, there is a net molecular dipole moment, as (0.9) and bromine (2.8) is 2.8 – 0.9 = 1.9. Since this
shown: difference is greater than 1.7, the bond is classified as
ionic.
(b) The difference in electronegativity between sodium
(0.9) and oxygen (3.5) is 3.5 – 0.9 = 2.6. Since this
(c) The oxygen atom has two bonds and two lone pairs difference is greater than 1.7, the Na–O bond is classified
(steric number = 4), and VSEPR predicts bent geometry. as ionic. In contrast, the O–H bond is polar covalent,
As such, the dipole moments associated with the polar O– because the difference in electronegativity between
H bonds do not cancel each other, and the dipole moments oxygen (3.5) and hydrogen (2.1) is less than 1.7 but more
associated with the lone pairs also do not fully cancel each than 0.5.
other. As a result, there is a net molecular dipole moment,
as shown: (c) Each C–H bond is considered to be covalent, because
the difference in electronegativity between carbon (2.5)
and hydrogen (2.1) is les
--- PAGE 17 ---
CHAPTER 1 17
The O–H bond is polar covalent, because the difference in
electronegativity between oxygen (3.5) and hydrogen
(2.1) is less than 1.7 but more than 0.5.
(e) Each C–H bond is considered to be covalent, because
the difference in electronegativity between carbon (2.5)
and hydrogen (2.1) is less than 0.5.
The C=O bond is polar covalent, because the difference in
electronegativity between oxygen (3.5) and carbon (2.5)
is less than 1.7 but more than 0.5.
1.42.
(a) Begin by determining the valency of each atom in the
compound. The carbon atoms are tetravalent, the oxygen
(c) The carbon atoms are tetravalent, while the bromine
atom is divalent, and the hydrogen atoms are all
atoms and hydrogen atoms are all monovalent. The atoms
monovalent. Any atoms with more than one bond (in this
with more than one bond (in this case, the two carbon
case, the two carbon atoms and the oxygen atom) should
atoms) should be drawn in the center of the compound.
be drawn in the center of the compound, with the
The bromine atoms and hydrogen atoms are then placed
hydrogen atoms at the periphery. There are two different
at the periphery, and there are two different ways to do
ways to connect two carbon atoms and an oxygen atom,
this. The two bromine atoms can either be connected to
shown here:
the same carbon atom or to different carbon atoms, as
shown.
We then complete both structures by drawing the
remaining bonds to hydrogen atoms (ensuring that each
carbon atom has four bonds, and each oxygen atom has
two bonds): 1.43.
(a) Oxygen is more electronegative than carbon, and the
withdrawal of electron density toward oxygen can be
indicated with the following arrow:
(b) Begin by determining the valency of each atom in the
compound. The carbon atoms are tetravalent, the oxygen (b) Carbon is more electronegative than magnesium, and
atoms are divalent, and the hydrogen atoms are all the withdrawal of electron density toward carbon can be
monovalent. Any atoms with more than one bond (in this indicated with the following arrow:
case, the two carbon atoms and the two oxygen atoms)
should be drawn in the center of the compound, with the
hydrogen atoms at the periphery. There are several
different ways to connect two carbon atoms and two
oxygen atoms (highlighted, for clarity of comparison),
(c) Nitrogen is more electronegative than carbon, and the
shown here:
withdrawal of electron density toward nitrogen can be
indicated with the following arrow:
(d) Carbon is more electronegative than lithium, and the
withdrawal of electron density toward carbon can be
indicated with the following arrow:
We then complete all of these structures by drawing the
remaining bonds to hydrogen atoms:
--- PAGE 18 ---
18 CHAPTER 1
(e) Chlorine is more electronegative than carbon, and the (e) The oxygen atom has two bonds and two lone pairs
withdrawal of electron density toward chlorine can be (steric number = 4), and VSEPR theory predicts bent
indicated with the following arrow: geometry. Therefore, the C-O-C bond angle is expected
to be around 105º. The remaining bond angles are all
expected to be approximately 109.5º (because each carbon
atom has four bonds and tetrahedral geometry).
(f) Carbon is more electronegative than silicon, and the (f) The nitrogen atom has three bonds and one lone pair
withdrawal of electron density toward carbon can be (steric number = 4), and VSEPR theory predicts trigonal
indicated with the following arrow: pyramidal geometry, with bond angles of 107º. The
carbon atom is also tetrahedral (because it has four
bonds), although the bond angles around the carbon
atom are expected to be approximately 109.5º.
(g) Oxygen is more electronegative than hydrogen, and
the withdrawal of electron density toward oxygen can be
indicated with the following arrow:
(g) Each of the carbon atoms has four bonds (steric
number = 4), so each of these carbon atoms has tetrahedral
(h) Nitrogen is more electronegative than hydrogen, and geometry. Therefore, all bond angles are expected to be
the withdrawal of electron density toward nitrogen can be approximately 109.5º.
indicated with the following arrow:
1.44.
(h) The structure of acetonitrile (CH3CN) is shown below
(see the solution to Problem 1.35b).
(a) The oxygen atom has two bonds and two lone pairs
(steric number = 4), and VSEPR theory predicts bent
geometry. The C-O-H bond angle is expected to be
approximately 105º, and all other bonds angles are
expected to be approximately 109.5º (because each carbon
atom has four bonds and tetrahedral geometry).
One of the carbon atoms has four bonds (steric number
(b) The central carbon atom has three bonds and no lone = 4), and is expected to have tetrahedral geometry. The
pairs (steric number = 3), and VSEPR theory predicts other carbon atom (connected to nitrogen) has two
trigonal planar geometry. As such, all bond angles are bonds and no lone pairs (steric number = 2), so we
approximately 120º. expect linear geometry.
As such, the C–C≡N bond angle is 180º, and all other bond
angles are approximately 109.5º.
1.45.
(a) The nitrogen atom has three bonds and one lone pair
(c) Each of the carbon atoms has three bonds and no (steric number = 4). It is sp3 hybridized (electronically
lone pairs (steric number = 3), and VSEPR theory predicts tetrahedral), with trigonal pyramidal geometry (because
trigonal planar geometry. As such, all bond angles are one corner of the tetrahedron is occupied by a lone pair).
approximately 120º.
(b) The boron atom has three bonds and no lone pairs
(steric number = 3). It is sp2 hybridized, with trigonal
planar geometry.
(c) This carbon atom has three bonds and no lone pairs
(d) Each of the carbon atoms has
--- PAGE 19 ---
CHAPTER 1 19
tetrahedral), with trigonal pyramidal geometry (because 1.48. The double bond represents one bond and one 
one corner of the tetrahedron is occupied by a lone pair). bond, while the triple bond represents one bond and two
 bonds. All single bonds are bonds. Therefore, this
1.46. compound has sixteen bonds and three  bonds.
(a) Each corner and each endpoint represents a carbon
atom (highlighted), so this compound has nine carbon
atoms. Each carbon atom will have enough hydrogen
atoms to have exactly four bonds, as shown.
1.49.
(a) The second compound is expected to have a higher
boiling point, because it has an O–H bond, which will lead
to hydrogen bonding interactions.
(b) The second compound is expected to have a higher
boiling point, because it has more carbon atoms, and thus
a higher molecular weight and more opportunity for
(b) Each corner and each endpoint represents a carbon
London dispersion forces.
atom (highlighted below), so this compound has eight
carbon atoms. Each carbon atom will have enough
(c) The first compound has a C=O bond, which has a
hydrogen atoms to have exactly four bonds, as shown.
strong dipole moment, while the second compound is
nonpolar. The first compound is therefore expected to
exhibit strong dipole-dipole interactions and to have a
higher boiling point than the second compound.
1.50.
(a) This compound possesses an O–H bond, so it is
expected to exhibit hydrogen bonding interactions.
(c) Each corner and each endpoint represents a carbon
atom (highlighted below), so this compound has eight
carbon atoms. Each carbon atom will have enough
hydrogen atoms to have exactly four bonds, as shown.
(b) This compound lacks a hydrogen atom that is
connected to an oxygen or nitrogen atom. Therefore, this
compound cannot serve as a hydrogen-bond donor
(although the lone pairs can serve as hydrogen-bond
acceptors, in the presence of a hydrogen-bond donor). As
a pure compound, we do not expect there to be any
hydrogen bonding interactions.
1.47. Each corner and each endpoint represents a carbon
atom, so this compound has fifteen carbon atoms. Each
carbon atom will have enough hydrogen atoms to have (c) This compound lacks a hydrogen atom that is
exactly four bonds, giving a total of eighteen hydrogen connected to an oxygen or nitrogen atom. Therefore, this
atoms, as shown here: compound will not exhibit hydrogen bonding interactions.
(d) This compound lacks a hydrogen atom that is
connected to an oxygen or nitrogen atom . Therefore, this
compound will not exhibit hydrogen bonding interactions.
--- PAGE 20 ---
20 CHAPTER 1
(e) This compound lacks a hydrogen atom that is 1.52.
connected to an oxygen or nitrogen atom. Therefore, this (a) Each of the highlighted carbon atoms has three
compound cannot serve as a hydrogen-bond donor bonds and no lone pairs (steric number = 3). Each of
(although the lone pairs can serve as hydrogen-bond these carbon atoms is sp2 hybridized, with trigonal planar
acceptors, in the presence of a hydrogen-bond donor). As geometry. Each of the other four carbon atoms has two
a pure compound, we do not expect there to be any bonds and no lone pairs (steric number = 2). Those four
hydrogen bonding interactions. carbon atoms are all sp hybridized, with linear geometry.
(f) This compound possesses two N–H bonds, so it is
expected to exhibit hydrogen bonding interactions.
(b) The highlighted carbon atom has three bonds and no
lone pairs (steric number = 3). This carbon atom is sp2
hybridized, with trigonal planar geometry. Each of the
other three carbon atoms has four bonds (steric number
= 4). Those three carbon atoms are all sp3 hybridized,
with tetrahedral geometry.
(g) This compound lacks a hydrogen atom that is
connected to an oxygen or nitrogen atom. Therefore, this
compound will not exhibit hydrogen bonding interactions.
1.53. Each of the highlighted carbon atoms has four
bonds (steric number = 4), and is sp3 hybridized, with
(h) This compound possesses N–H bonds, so it is expected
tetrahedral geometry. Each of the other fourteen carbon
to exhibit hydrogen bonding interactions.
atoms in this structure has three bonds and no lone pairs
(steric number = 3). Each of these fourteen carbon atoms
is sp2 hybridized, with trigonal planar geometry.
1.51.
(a) Boron is in group 3A of the periodic table, and
therefore has three valence electrons. It can use each of
its valence electrons to form a bond, so we expect the
molecular formula to be BH3 (x=3).
(b) Carbon is in group 4A of the periodic table, and
therefore has four valence electrons. It can use each of its
valence electrons to form a bond, so we expect the
molecular formula to be CH4 (x=4).
1.54.
(c) Nitrogen is in group 5A of the periodic table, and (a) Oxygen is the most electronegative atom in this
therefore has five valence electrons. But it cannot form compound. See Table 1.1 for electronegativity values.
five bonds, because it only has four orbitals with which to
form bonds. One of those orbitals must be occupied by a (b) Fluorine is the most electronegative atom. See Table
lone pair (two electrons), and each of the remaining three 1.1 for electronegativity values.
electrons is available to form a bond. Nitrogen is
therefore trivalent, and we expect the molecular formula (c) Carbon is the most electronegative atom in this
to be NH3 (x=3). compound. See Table 1.1 for electronegativity values.
(d) Carbon is in group 4A of the periodic table, and 1.55. The highlighted nitrogen atom has two bonds and
therefore has four valence electrons. It can use each of its one 
--- PAGE 21 ---
CHAPTER 1 21
hybridized and electronically tetrahedral. One corner of (c) Each C–Cl bond has a dipole moment, and in this case,
the tetrahedron is occupied by a lone pair, so the geometry the two dipole moments are pointing in opposite
(arrangement of atoms) is trigonal pyramidal. directions. As such, they fully cancel each other, giving
no net molecular dipole moment.
(d) The C–Cl bond has a dipole moment, and the C–Br
bond also has a dipole moment. These two dipole
moments are in opposite directions, but they do not have
the same magnitude. The C–Cl bond has a larger dipole
moment than the C–Br bond, because chlorine is more
electronegative than bromine. Therefore, there will be a
net molecular dipole moment, as shown here:
1.56. Each of the nitrogen atoms in caffeine achieves an
octet with three bonds and one lone pair, while each
oxygen atom in this structure achieves an octet with two
bonds and two lone pairs, as shown:
1.59. The CCl bond in chloroform partially cancels the
dipole moments of the other two CCl bonds, thereby
reducing the molecular dipole moment relative to
methylene chloride.
1.57. As seen in Section 1.2, the following two
compounds have the molecular formula C2H6O.
1.60. CHCl3 is expected to have a larger molecular dipole
moment than CBrCl3, because the bromine atom in
CBrCl3 serves to partially cancel out the dipole moments
of the three CCl bonds (as is the case for CCl4).
The second compound will have a higher boiling point 1.61. The carbon atom of O=C=O has two bonds and
because it possesses an OH group which can exhibit no lone pairs (steric number = 2) and VSEPR theory
hydrogen bonding interactions. predicts linear geometry. As a result, the individual dipole
moments of each C=O bond cancel each other completely
1.58. to give no overall molecular dipole moment. In contrast,
(a) Each C–Cl bond has a dipole moment, and the two the sulfur atom in SO2 has a steric number of three
dipole moments do not fully cancel each other because the (because it also has a lone pair, in addition to the two S=O
polar bonds are not pointing in opposite directions. As bonds), which means that it has bent geometry. As a
such, there will be a net molecular dipole moment, as result, the individual dipole moments of each S=O bond
shown here: do NOT cancel each other completely, and the molecule
does have a molecular dipole moment.
1.62. Two compounds possess OH groups. These two
compounds will have the highest boiling points, because
they can form hydrogen bonds. Among these two
compounds, the one with more carbon atoms (six) will be
(b) Each C–Cl bond has a dipole moment, and the two
higher boiling than the one with fewer carbon atoms
dipole moments do not fully cancel each other because the
(four), because the higher molecular weight results in
polar bonds are not pointing in opposite directions. As
greater London dispersion forces. The remaining three
such, there will be a net molecular dipole moment, as
compounds all have equal molecul
--- PAGE 22 ---
22 CHAPTER 1
bonds, so it is sp3-hybridized, and the carbon on the right
has three  bonds, so it is sp2-hybridized. The indicated
 bond results from the overlap of one sp3 hybridized
orbital (from the carbon atom on the left), and one sp2
hybridized orbital (from the carbon atom on the right).
1.68. The correct answer is (c). An atom with a trigonal
planar arrangement of bonds has a bond angle of 120°, the
largest bond angle among the choices listed. A tetrahedral
arrangement of bonds corresponds to an angle of 109.5°,
while trigonal pyramidal and bent geometries typically
have bond angles that are slightly smaller than 109.5°.
1.63. The correct answer is (a). We must first draw the
structure of HCN. To draw a Lewis structure, we begin
by counting the valence electrons (hydrogen has one
valence electron, carbon has four valence electrons, and
nitrogen has five valence electrons, for a total of ten
valence electrons). The structure must have ten valence 1.69. The correct answer is (c). There are 13  bonds in
electrons (no more and no less). Carbon should have four the given compound (highlighted in bold below). All of
bonds, and it can only form a single bond with the the single bonds are  bonds, and the double bond is
hydrogen atom, so there must be a triple bond between
comprised of one  bond and one  bond.
carbon and nitrogen:
The single bond accounts for two electrons, and the triple
bonds accounts for another six electrons. The remaining
two electrons must be a lone pair on nitrogen. This
accounts for all ten valence electrons, and it gives all
atoms an octet. 1.70. The correct answer is (b). Each C–Cl bond in Y has
Since the carbon atom has a triple bond, it must be sp a dipole moment, and compound Y has a molecular dipole
hybridized, with linear geometry. moment. Each CCl bond in X also has a dipole moment,
but in this case, the two polar bonds are pointing in
1.64. The molecular formula of cyclobutane is C4H8. Of opposite directions. As such, the dipole moments fully
the four structures shown, only structure (c) has the same cancel each other, giving no net molecular dipole moment
molecular formula (C4H8). for compound X. The polar isomer (Y) has more
significant dipole-dipole attractions between molecules
1.65. The correct answer is (b). Each of the structures has and, therefore, has a higher boiling point than the nonpolar
two carbon atoms and one oxygen atom. However, only isomer (X).
the second structure has an OH group. This compound
will have an elevated boiling point, relative to the other
three structures, because of hydrogen bonding.
1.66. The first statement (a) is the correct answer, because
an oxygen atom has a negative charge, and the nitrogen
atom has a positive charge, as shown here:
1.71. The correct answer is (b). In the bond-line drawing,
each corner and each endpoint represents a carbon atom,
so this compound has three carbon atoms (highlighted
below). Each carbon atom will have enough hydrogen
atoms to have exact
--- PAGE 23 ---
CHAPTER 1 23
H H three bonds and one  bond). There are certainly many
other possible compounds for which all of the carbon
OH C C O H
atoms are sp2 hybridized.
H C H
H
1.72. The correct answer is (d). In the bond-line drawing,
each corner represents a carbon atom (highlighted below),
so this compound has nine carbon atoms. Each double
bond is comprised of one  bond and one  bond, so there
are five  bonds (in bold below).
(b) In each of the following two compounds, all of the
carbon atoms are sp3 hybridized (because each carbon
atom has four bonds) with the exception of the carbon
atom connected to the nitrogen atom. That carbon atom
has two bonds and is therefore sp hybridized. There are
1.73. certainly many other acceptable answers.
(a) Compounds A and B share the same molecular
formula (C4H9N) but differ in their constitution
(connectivity of atoms), and they are therefore
constitutional isomers.
(b) The nitrogen atom in compound B has three bonds
and one lone pair (steric number = 4). It is sp3 hybridized
(electronically tetrahedral), with trigonal pyramidal
geometry (because one corner of the tetrahedron is
occupied by a lone pair).
(c) In each of the following two compounds, there is a
ring, and all of the carbon atoms are sp3 hybridized
(c) A double bond represents one bond and one  bond,
(because each carbon atom has four bonds). There are
while a triple bond represents one bond and two  certainly many other acceptable answers.
bonds. A single bond represents a bond. With this in
mind, compound B has 14 bonds, as compared with
compounds A and C, which have 13 and 11 bonds,
respectively.
(d) As explained in the solution to part (c), compound C
has the fewest bonds.
(e) A double bond represents one bond and one  bond,
(d) In each of the following two compounds, all of the
while a triple bond represents one bond and two 
carbon atoms are sp hybridized (because each carbon atom
bonds. As such, compound C exhibits two  bonds.
has two bonds). There are certainly many other
acceptable answers.
(f) Compound A has a C=N bond, in which the carbon
atom has three bonds and no lone pairs (steric number
= 3). It is sp2 hybridized.
(g) Each of the carbon atoms in compound B is sp3
hybridized with four bonds (steric number = 4).
1.75. In each of the following two compounds, the
Similarly, the nitrogen atom in compound B has three
molecular formula is C4H10N2, there is a ring (as
bonds and one lone pair (steric number = 4). This
suggested in the hint given in the problem statement),
nitrogen atom is also sp3 hybridized.
there are no  bonds, there is no net dipole moment, and
there is an N-H bond, which enables hydrogen bonding
(h) Compound A has an N–H bond, and is therefore
interactions.
expected to form hydrogen bonding interactions.
Compounds B and C do not contain an N–H bond, so
compound A is expected to have the highest boiling point.
1.74.
(a) In each of the following two compounds, all of the
carbon atoms
--- PAGE 24 ---
24 CHAPTER 1
1.76. If we try to draw a linear skeleton with five carbon Now we have the correct number of hydrogen atoms
atoms and one nitrogen atom, we find that the number of (eleven), which means that our structure must indeed
hydrogen atoms is not correct (there are thirteen, rather contain a ring. But this particular cyclic structure (cyclic
than eleven): = containing a ring) does not meet all of the criteria
described in the problem statement. Specifically, each
carbon atom must be connected to exactly two hydrogen
atoms. This is not the case in the structure above. This
issue can be remedied in the following structure, which
has a ring, and each of the carbon atoms is connected to
exactly two hydrogen atoms, as required by the problem
This will be the case even if try to draw a branched statement.
skeleton:
1.77.
(a) In compound A, the nitrogen atom has two bonds
and no lone pairs (steric number = 2). It is sp hybridized.
In fact, regardless of how the skeleton is branched, it will
The highlighted carbon atom has one bond and one lone
still have thirteen hydrogen atoms. But we need to draw
pair (steric number = 2), so that carbon atom is also sp
a structure with only eleven hydrogen atoms (C5H11N).
hybridized.
So we must remove two hydrogen atoms, which gives two
unpaired electrons:
(b) The highlighted carbon atom is sp hybridized, so the
lone pair occupies an sp-hybridized orbital.
(c) The nitrogen atom is sp hybridized and therefore has
linear geometry. As such, the C-N-C bond angle in A is
expected to be 180°.
(d) The nitrogen atom in B has two bonds and one lone
pair (steric number = 3). It is sp2 hybridized. The
highlighted carbon atom has three bonds and no lone
pairs (steric number = 3), and that carbon atom is sp2
hybridized. Each of the chlorine atoms has three lone pairs
and one bond (steric number = 4), and the chlorine atoms
are sp3 hybridized.
This indicates that we should consider pairing these
electrons as a double bond. However, the problem
(e) The nitrogen atom is sp2 hybridized, so the lone pair
statement specifically indicates that the structure cannot
occupies an sp2-hybridized orbital.
contain a double bond. So, we must find another way to
pair the unpaired electrons. Let’s consider forming a ring
(f) The nitrogen atom is sp2 hybridized so the C-N-C bond
instead of a double bond:
angle in B is expected to be approximately 120°.
1.78. By analyzing the data, we can see that C(sp2)–Cl
must be shorter than 1.79Å [compare with C(sp3)–Cl],
while C(sp)–I must be longer than 1.79Å [compare with
C(sp)–Br]. Therefore, C(sp)–I must be longer than
C(sp2)–Cl.
1.79.
(a) In the first compound, the fluorine isotope (18F) has
no formal charge. Therefore, it must have three lone pairs
(see Section 1.4 for a review of how formal charges are
calculated). Since it has one bond and three lone pairs,
it must have a steric number of 4, and is sp3 hybridized.
The bromine atom also has no formal charge. So, it too,
like the fluorine i
--- PAGE 25 ---
CHAPTER 1 25
In the second compound, the nitrogen atom has no formal 1.81.
charge. Therefore, it must have one lone pair. Since the (a) If we analyze each atom (in both 1 and 2) using the
nitrogen atom has three bonds and one lone pair, it must procedure outlined in Section 1.4, we find that none of the
have a steric number of 4, and is sp3 hybridized. atoms in compound 1 have a formal charge, while
In the product, the fluorine isotope (18F) has no formal compound 2 possesses two formal charges:
charge. Therefore, it must have three lone pairs. Since it
has one bond and three lone pairs, it must have a steric
number of 4, and is sp3 hybridized. The nitrogen atom
does have a positive formal charge. Therefore, it must
have no lone pairs. Since it has four bonds and no lone
The nitrogen atom has a positive charge (it should have
pairs, it must have a steric number of 4, and is sp3
five valence electrons, but it is exhibiting only four), and
hybridized. Finally, the bromine atom has a negative
the oxygen atom has a negative charge (it should have six
charge and no bonds. So it must have four lone pairs.
valence electrons, but it is exhibiting seven).
With four lone pairs and no bonds, it will have a steric
number of 4, and is expected to be sp3 hybridized.
(b) Compound 1 possesses polar bonds, as a result of the
In summary, all of the atoms that we analyzed are sp3
presence of partial charges (+ and -). The associated
hybridized.
dipole moments can form favorable interactions with the
dipole moments present in the polar solvent molecules
(b) The nitrogen atom is sp3 hybridized. With four bonds,
(dipole-dipole interactions). However, compound 2 has
we expect the geometry around the nitrogen atom to be
formal charges (negative on O and positive on N), so the
tetrahedral. So, the bond angle for each C-N-C bond is
dipole moment of the N-O bond is expected to be much
expected to be approximately 109.5°.
more significant than the dipole moments in compound 1.
The dipole moment of the N-O bond in compound 2 is the
1.80.
result of full charges, rather than partial charges. As such,
(a) Boron is in group 3A of the periodic table and is
compound 2 is expected to experience much stronger
therefore expected to be trivalent. That is, it has three
interactions with the solvent molecules, and therefore, 2
valence electrons, and it uses each one of those valence
should be more soluble than 1 in a polar solvent.
electrons to form a bond, giving rise to three bonds. It
does not have any electrons left over for a lone pair (as in
(c) In compound 1, the carbon atom (attached to nitrogen)
the case of nitrogen). With three bonds and no lone
has three bonds and no lone pairs (steric number = 3).
pairs, the boron atom has a steric number of three, and is
That carbon atom is sp2 hybridized, with trigonal planar
sp2 hybridized.
geometry. As such, the C-C-N bond angle in compound
1 is expected to be approximately 120°. However, in
(b) Since the boron atom is sp2 hy
--- PAGE 26 ---
26 CHAPTER 1
from one another (just as we saw for the carbon atoms of The other N-C-N unit (highlighted below) exhibits a
a triple bond; see Figure 1.33). central carbon atom that is sp2 hybridized and is therefore
expected to have trigonal planar geometry. Accordingly,
the bond angles about that carbon atom are expected to be
approximately 120°.
As a result, the two  systems are orthogonal (or 90°) to
each other. Therefore, the p orbitals on Ca and Cc are
orthogonal. The following is another drawing from a
different perspective (looking down the axis of the linear
Ca-Cb-Cc system.
(b) The interaction is an intramolecular hydrogen bond
that forms between the + H (connected to the highlighted
nitrogen atom) and the lone pair of the – oxygen atom:
1.83.
(a) The N-C-N unit highlighted below exhibits a central
carbon atom that is sp3 hybridized and is therefore
expected to have tetrahedral geometry. Accordingly, the
bond angles about that carbon atom are expected to be
approximately 109.5°.
